# P3482R1: C++ Networking based on IETF TAPS

> Source: [https://www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg21/docs/papers/2025/p3482r1.html](https://www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg21/docs/papers/2025/p3482r1.html)

## Abstract

We propose modifying the API proposed by [p2762] to support IETF TAPS as a basis for standard networking in C++.

## Revision History

### r0 → r1

- Fixed typographical issues.
- Added `std::octet` and changed types which are defined by the governing Internet Protocol RFCs in terms of a type of exactly 8 bits to use `std::octet`.
- Strengthen reference to [p1860] and the requirement of secure connections as the default.

### r0

[p3482R0] was the first published version of the paper.

## Background

- **[p2762]** Proposes a modification to the [netts] to adopt the Sender/Receiver model (targeted to C++26).
- **[p3185]** Proposed a direction for C++ networking based on IETF TAPS. The process of obtaining a connection in the TAPS model is substantially different from other approaches based on Berkeley Sockets or abstractions over the socket oriented model such as the [netts] and [asio].
- **[p1861]** sketched out an interface proposal derived from Apple’s Network.Framework [ANF] and to which TAPS has design lineage.

## The TAPS Approach

IETF TAPS uses a **property-based approach** for describing the requirements of a connection. The TAPS infrastructure uses these properties to select a set of one or more candidates that satisfy the supplied properties. These candidates can then be used to request a connection which then conforms to the supplied properties.

### Preconnections

Creating a connection begins with a **preconnection**. TAPS specifies four groups of properties which define a preconnection object:

- Local Endpoint
- Remote Endpoint
- Transport
- Security

### Endpoints

Endpoints define the origin and destination points for a connection and are distinguished into local and remote types. Endpoints have the following properties:

- `hostname`, e.g. `"nyarlathotep.example.org"`
- `interface`, e.g. `"en0"`
- `service`, e.g. `"https"`
- `multicast_group`, e.g. `"224.0.0.252"` or `"ff02::114"`
- `hop_limit`, e.g. `2`

### Transports

Transports are defined by a set of requirements that the underlying infrastructure is expected to satisfy. Most transport requirements are expressed as **preferences** which can take one of the following values:

- `Require`
- `Prefer`
- `None`
- `Avoid`
- `Prohibit`

Transports have the following properties:

- `interface` — multivalued set of (interface, preference) tuples
- `reliability` — preference
- `preserve_msg_boundaries` — preference
- `per_msg_reliability` — preference
- `preserve_order` — preference
- `zero_rtt_msg` — preference
- `multistreaming` — preference
- `full_checksum_send` / `full_checksum_recv` — preference
- `congestion_control` — preference
- `keep_alive` — preference
- `use_temp_local_address` — preference
- `multipath` — enumeration `{ disabled, active, passive }`
- `advertises_alt_addr` — preference
- `direction` — enumeration `{ both, send, recv }`
- `soft_error_notify` — preference
- `active_read_before_send` — preference

### Security

Security for transports are also defined by a set of requirements that must be satisfied. The following properties are supported:

- `allowed_security_protocols` — sequence of protocol identifiers
- `server_cert` / `client_cert` / `pinned_server_cert` — sequence of certificates
- `alpn` — sequence of application layer protocol negotiation values
- `supported_group` — sequence of group identifiers
- `ciphersuite` — sequence of ciphersuite identifiers
- `signature_algorithm` — sequence of algorithm identifiers
- `max_cached_session` — integer
- `cached_session_lifetime` — duration
- `preshared_key` — key material
- `trust_verification_handler` — sequence sender
- `challenge_handler` — sequence sender

### Preconnections and Connections

The endpoint, transport, and security property sets are used to create a preconnection. Preconnections are then used to establish connections. TAPS defines three methods on a preconnection type for creating a connection:

- **Initiate** → Connection, an _Active Open_ connection (could be named `client_connection`)
- **Listen** → Connection, a _Passive Open_ connection (could be named `server_connection`)
- **Rendezvous** → Connection, a _Peer to Peer_ connection (could be named `peer_to_peer_connection`)

TAPS further specifies that a preconnection can be modified, but such modifications only have effects on subsequent connections.

TAPS specifies that preconnections can perform endpoint resolution:

- **Resolve** → `(local_endpoint[], remote_endpoint[])`

### Message Based

TAPS is explicitly **message based**. This is a departure from Berkeley Sockets or the [netts] which yield up buffers as data arrives, leaving framing up to the application.

TAPS introduces the notion of a **Framer** which produces complete messages (or an error) from one or more chunks of received data. Framers are an optional argument to obtaining a Connection from a Preconnection. Framers are event driven, receiving events about connection initiation, incoming and outgoing data, and connection termination.

A `default_framer` could behave similarly to typical Berkeley socket code and yield the octets received thus far. Higher level examples of framers might include an `http_framer` that would parse HTTP headers and message boundaries.

#### Message Contexts

On calls to send and receive data, the application may provide a `MessageContext`. On completion of a Send or Receive operation, the event handler is provided the `MessageContext` associated with that event. These contexts serve several functions:

- Communicate framer-specific properties
- Communicate with the eventual `set_value()` handler
- Correlate multiple partial Send or Receive operations
- Contain connection information such as interface, remote endpoint, etc.

## Design Discussion

The proposed general direction is to prefer TAPS concepts where sensible — e.g., in describing the properties of a connection, being message oriented, user extensible framing and message types — but to otherwise adopt and amend as much of [p2762] as is applicable.

For instance, [p2762] defines a socket type(s) and a range of CPOs defining the operations over that type. Rather than a socket, the `connect()`, `listen()` and `rendezvous()` CPOs proposed here return a `connection` for which CPOs like `async_send()` and `async_receive()` would operate on.

[p1860] makes the case that "C++ Networking Must Be Secure by Default". The default choices made by an implementation when presented with the minimal, default set of security properties, MUST result in the creation of a "secure" transport connection.

[p3477] seeks to define a byte, and `std::byte` as being exactly 8 bits for C++. Networking however, requires a more precise definition. The Internet Protocol defines the fundamental types and payload framing in terms of multiples of **octets** which are exactly 8 bits. This proposal suggests defining `std::net::octet` to be a type of exactly 8 bits.

TAPS expects that a connection is a single object type that exposes all of the necessary operations to cover each of the distinct types of connection. **This paper instead proposes that each kind of connection be a distinct type**, exposing only those operations supported by the underlying transport for that type of connection. It is further proposed that the various connect operations be customization points, based on the type of the supplied preconnection argument, permitting vendor/user customization for supporting non-TCP/IP based transports.

The Standard Library would provide a default transport implementation that conforms to the endpoint, transport, and security properties outlined by TAPS, segregating those types specific to TCP/IP into a `net::ip` namespace.

Preconnections are constructed from sets of properties that describe the endpoints, transport, and security requirements. [p3325] describes a mechanism for constructing and querying strongly typed properties for `std::execution` environments. Making a preconnection a template requiring its argument types to conform to the proposed `queryable` concept allows user code to provide any type(s) which satisfy this constraint. A related proposal being explored is a type-erased `runtime_env`, which conforms to the `queryable` concept.

The set of properties allowed should be open-ended. This paper proposes that `connect()`, `listen()`, and `rendezvous()` be expressed as CPOs, which would allow customization over how the properties of a preconnection are processed.

Connection negotiation and establishment, framing, message sending, and receipt are all inherently asynchronous operations in TAPS. The C++ design for these features should use the sender/receiver vocabulary targeted at C++26.

[p2762] modifies the socket based approach of the [netts] to adopt the Sender/Receiver model. Some of these operations are subsumed by the design approach taken by TAPS:

- `async_accept()` is subsumed by the proposed `async_listen()` sender operation
- `async_connect()` is subsumed by the proposed `async_initiate()` operation
- `async_resolve_address()` and `async_resolve_name()` are subsumed by the proposed `async_resolve()` operation

TAPS is explicitly message based. `async_send()` is a customization point intended to send whole messages. The decision as to how a message is encoded to an underlying transport under TAPS is delegated to a customizable Framer, which is supplied at connection establishment. TAPS message operations always include a caller supplied message context.

Similarly, `async_receive()` is a customization point intended to receive whole messages. There is no difference between receiving a message from a stream transport vs. a datagram oriented transport from the user’s perspective so `async_receive_from()` is removed. TAPS allows for partial receive operations, which are similar to `async_read_some()`.

## Proposed API

These types are from (generally) [p3325] and live in the `std::execution` namespace.

### 6.1 `std::execution::property_key_list`

```cpp
namespace std::execution {
    template<typename... Ts>
    class property_key_list { };
}
```

### 6.2 `std::execution::is_property_key_list_v`

```cpp
namespace std::execution {
    template<typename T>
    inline constexpr bool is_property_key_list_v = false;

    template<typename... Ts>
    inline constexpr bool is_property_key_list_v<property_key_list<Ts...>> = true;
}
```

### 6.3 `std::execution::queryable`

This concept determines whether or not a type is a Queryable Environment.

```cpp
namespace std::execution {
    template<typename T>
    concept queryable =
        requires {
            typename T::property_keys;
            requires is_property_key_list_v<typename T::property_keys>;
        };
}
```

### 6.4 `std::execution::has_query`

This concept determines if an Environment supports a Query.

```cpp
namespace std::execution {
    template<typename E, typename Q>
    concept has_query =
        requires (E const& env) { env.query(Q{ }); };
}
```

### 6.5 `std::execution::has_query_default`

This concept determines whether or not an Environment has a default value for a given Query.

```cpp
namespace std::execution {
    template<typename Q>
    concept has_query_default =
        requires { Q::default_value(); };
}
```

### 6.6 `std::execution::property`

This concept determines what it means for a type to be a property.

```cpp
namespace std::execution {
    template<typename T>
    concept property =
        std::is_empty_v<T> && std::default_initializable<T>;
}
```

### 6.7 `std::execution::has_property`

This concept determines if a Queryable has a given property.

```cpp
namespace std::execution {
    template<typename Q, typename P>
    concept has_property =
        queryable<Q> && property<P> && has_query<Q, P>;
}
```

### 6.8 `std::execution::has_try_query`

This concept determines if an Environment supports `try_query`.

```cpp
namespace std::execution {
    template<typename E, typename Q>
    concept has_try_query =
        requires (E const& env) { env.try_query(Q{ }); };
}
```

### 6.9 `std::execution::maybe_has_property`

This concept determines if a Queryable may optionally have a given property.

```cpp
namespace std::execution {
    template<typename Q, typename P>
    concept maybe_has_property =
        queryable<Q> && property<P> && has_try_query<Q, P>;
}
```

### 6.10 `std::execution::runtime_property`

This concept determines if a type is a runtime type-erasable property.

```cpp
namespace std::execution {
    template<typename T>
    concept runtime_property =
        property<T> && requires { typename T::type_erased_type; };
}
```

### 6.11 `std::execution::runtime_env`

A runtime type-erased Queryable Environment.

```cpp
namespace std::execution {
    class runtime_env {
    public:
        runtime_env() noexcept = default;
        operator runtime_env_ref() const noexcept;

        template<runtime_property P, typename Tp>
            requires std::constructible_from<typename P::type_erased_type, Tp>
        void set(P prop, Tp&& init);

        template<runtime_property P>
        void unset(P) noexcept;

        template<runtime_property P>
        std::optional<typename P::type_erased_type> try_query(P prop) const
            noexcept(std::is_nothrow_copy_constructible_v<typename P::type_erased_type>);
    };
}
```

### 6.12 Octets

A type which is guaranteed to be exactly 8 bits.

```cpp
namespace std::net {
    using octet = uint8_t; // exposition only
}
```

### 6.13 Properties of endpoints

#### 6.13.1 `std::net::ip::address_v4`

```cpp
namespace std::net::ip {
    class address_v4 {
    public:
        using uint_type = uint_least32_t;
        using octets_type = std::array<octet, sizeof(uint_type)>;

        constexpr address_v4() noexcept;
        constexpr explicit address_v4(octets_type const& octets) noexcept;
        constexpr explicit address_v4(uint_type v);
    };
}
```

#### 6.13.2 `std::net::ip::address_v6`

```cpp
namespace std::net::ip {
    using scope_id_type = uint_least32_t;

    class address_v6 {
    public:
        static constexpr std::size_t const octets_len = sizeof(::in6_addr::s6_addr);
        using octets_type = std::array<octet, octets_len>;

        constexpr address_v6() noexcept;
        constexpr explicit address_v6(octets_type const& octets,
                                      scope_id_type scope = 0);
    };
}
```

#### 6.13.3 `std::net::ip::address`

```cpp
namespace std::net::ip {
    class address {
    public:
        constexpr explicit address(address_v4 addr);
        constexpr explicit address(address_v6 addr);

        constexpr bool is_v4() const noexcept;
        constexpr bool is_v6() const noexcept;
    };
}
```

#### 6.13.4 `std::net::hostname`

```cpp
namespace std::net {
    class hostname {
    public:
        hostname(std::string_view str);
    };
}
```

#### 6.13.5 `std::net::interface`

```cpp
namespace std::net {
    class interface {
    public:
        interface(std::string_view str);
    };
}
```

#### 6.13.6 `std::net::service`

```cpp
namespace std::net {
    class service {
    public:
        service(std::string_view str);
        // TODO constants for well known services, e.g. 'https'
    };
}
```

#### 6.13.7 `std::net::single_source_multicast_group_address`

```cpp
namespace std::net {
    class single_source_multicast_group_address {
    public:
        single_source_multicast_group_address(ip::address group, ip::address source) noexcept;

        ip::address const& group() const noexcept;
        ip::address const& source() const noexcept;
    };
}
```

#### 6.13.8 `std::net::endpoint_props`

Nested namespace containing strongly typed properties of endpoints.

```cpp
namespace std::net::endpoint_props {
    class hostname {
    public:
        using value_type = hostname;
    };

    class ip_address {
    public:
        using value_type = ip::address;
    };

    class port {
    public:
        using value_type = uint16_t;
    };

    class interface {
    public:
        using value_type = interface;
    };

    class service {
    public:
        using value_type = service;
    };

    class multicast_group {
    public:
        using value_type = ip::address;
    };

    class hop_limit {
    public:
        using value_type = uint16_t;
    };

    class any_source_multicast_group {
    public:
        using value_type = ip::address;
    };

    class single_source_multicast_group {
    public:
        using value_type = single_source_multicast_group_address;
    };
}
```

### 6.14 Properties of transports

#### 6.14.1 `std::net::transport_preference`

Enumeration to describe the preference for a transport property to apply to a connection.

```cpp
namespace std::net {
    enum class transport_preference {
        require,
        prefer,
        none,
        avoid,
        prohibit
    };
}
```

#### 6.14.2 `std::net::multipath_preference`

Enumeration describing the preference for the transport to support multipathing.

```cpp
namespace std::net {
    enum class multipath_preference {
        disabled,
        active,
        passive
    };
}
```

#### 6.14.3 `std::net::direction_preference`

Enumeration describing the directionality preference for a connection.

```cpp
namespace std::net {
    enum class direction_preference {
        bidirectional,
        send,
        recv
    };
}
```

#### 6.14.4 `std::net::interface_preference`

Multi-valued property indicating what preference(s) should be applied to local endpoints when evaluating potential networking interfaces.

```cpp
namespace std::net {
    class interface_preference {
    public:
        using value_type = std::pair<interface, transport_preference>;

        interface_preference() = default;
        interface_preference(std::initializer_list<value_type>&& values);
        interface_preference(interface iface, transport_preference pref);

        iterator begin() noexcept;
        const_iterator begin() const noexcept;
        iterator end() noexcept;
        const_iterator end() const noexcept;

        void set(interface iface, transport_preference pref) noexcept;
        void unset(interface iface) noexcept;
    };
}
```

#### 6.14.5 `std::net::transport_props`

Nested namespace containing strongly typed properties of transports. Each property class has `value_type` and `default_value()`.

```cpp
namespace std::net::transport_props {
    class interface {
    public:
        using value_type = interface_preference;
        static value_type default_value() noexcept;
    };

    class reliability {
    public:
        using value_type = transport_preference;
        static value_type default_value() noexcept; // require
    };

    class preserve_msg_boundaries {
    public:
        using value_type = transport_preference;
        static value_type default_value() noexcept; // none
    };

    class per_msg_reliability {
    public:
        using value_type = transport_preference;
        static value_type default_value() noexcept; // none
    };

    class preserve_order {
    public:
        using value_type = transport_preference;
        static value_type default_value() noexcept; // require
    };

    class zero_rtt_msg {
    public:
        using value_type = transport_preference;
        static value_type default_value() noexcept; // none
    };

    class multistreaming {
    public:
        using value_type = transport_preference;
        static value_type default_value() noexcept; // prefer
    };

    class full_checksum_send {
    public:
        using value_type = transport_preference;
        static value_type default_value() noexcept; // require
    };

    class full_checksum_recv {
    public:
        using value_type = transport_preference;
        static value_type default_value() noexcept; // require
    };

    class congestion_control {
    public:
        using value_type = transport_preference;
        static value_type default_value() noexcept; // require
    };

    class keep_alive {
    public:
        using value_type = transport_preference;
        static value_type default_value() noexcept; // none
    };

    class use_temp_local_address {
    public:
        using value_type = transport_preference;
        static value_type default_value() noexcept; // none
    };

    class multipath {
    public:
        using value_type = multipath_preference;
        static value_type default_value() noexcept; // disabled
    };

    class advertises_alt_addr {
    public:
        using value_type = bool;
        static value_type default_value() noexcept; // false
    };

    class direction {
    public:
        using value_type = direction_preference;
        static value_type default_value() noexcept; // bidirectional
    };

    class soft_error_notify {
    public:
        using value_type = transport_preference;
        static value_type default_value() noexcept; // none
    };

    class active_read_before_send {
    public:
        using value_type = transport_preference;
        static value_type default_value() noexcept; // none
    };
}
```

### 6.15 Properties governing transport security

#### 6.15.1 `std::net::security_props`

Nested namespace containing strongly typed security properties.

```cpp
namespace std::net::security_props {
    class allowed_protocols {
    public:
        using value_type = vector<string>;
        static typed_erased_type default_value() noexcept;
    };

    class server_certificate {
    public:
        using value_type = vector<string>;
        // no default value
    };

    class client_certificate {
    public:
        using value_type = vector<string>;
        // no default value
    };

    class pinned_server_certificate {
    public:
        using value_type = vector<string>;
        // no default value
    };

    class alpn_t {
    public:
        using value_type = vector<string>;
        // no default value
    };

    class supported_group {
    public:
        using value_type = vector<string>;
        // no default value
    };

    class ciphersuite {
    public:
        using value_type = vector<string>;
        // no default value
    };

    class signature_algorithm {
    public:
        using value_type = vector<string>;
        // no default value
    };

    class max_cached_sessions {
    public:
        using value_type = uint32_t;
        static value_type default_value() noexcept;
    };

    class cached_session_lifetime {
    public:
        using value_type = chrono::steady_clock::duration;
        static value_type default_value() noexcept;
    };

    // TODO: pre_shared_key, trust, challenge
}
```

### 6.16 Preconnections

#### 6.16.1 `net::preconnection`

```cpp
namespace std::net {
    class preconnection {
    public:
        template<execution::queryable LocalEndpoint,
                 execution::queryable RemoteEndpoint,
                 execution::queryable TransportProps,
                 execution::queryable SecurityProps>
        preconnection(LocalEndpoint local, RemoteEndpoint remote,
                      TransportProps transport, SecurityProps security);

        template<execution::queryable LocalEndpoint,
                 execution::queryable RemoteEndpoint,
                 execution::queryable TransportProps>
        preconnection(LocalEndpoint local, RemoteEndpoint remote,
                      TransportProps transport = /* implementation defined default */);

        template<execution::queryable RemoteEndpoint,
                 execution::queryable TransportProps>
        preconnection(RemoteEndpoint remote,
                      TransportProps transport = /* implementation defined default */);
    };
}
```

### 6.17 Resolving Endpoints

#### 6.17.1 `net::resolve`

```cpp
namespace std::net {
    struct resolve_t {
        template<execution::queryable Endpoint>
        resolve-result-type operator()(const Endpoint&);

        template<execution::queryable LocalEndpoint,
                 execution::queryable RemoteEndpoint>
        resolve-result-type operator()(const LocalEndpoint&, const RemoteEndpoint&);

        resolve-result-type operator()(const preconnection&);
    };

    inline constexpr resolve_t resolve{};
}
```

### 6.18 Obtaining Connections

#### 6.18.1 `net::initiate`

```cpp
namespace std::net {
    struct initiate_t {
        template<typename Preconnection, typename Framer>
        connection-type operator()(const Preconnection&, const Framer&);

        template<typename Preconnection>
        connection-type operator()(const Preconnection&);
    };

    inline constexpr initiate_t initiate{};
}
```

#### 6.18.2 `net::listen`

```cpp
namespace std::net {
    struct listen_t {
        template<typename Preconnection, typename Framer>
        listen-type operator()(const Preconnection&, const Framer&);

        template<typename Preconnection>
        listen-type operator()(const Preconnection&);
    };

    inline constexpr listen_t listen{};
}
```

#### 6.18.3 `net::rendezvous`

```cpp
namespace std::net {
    struct rendezvous_t {
        template<typename Preconnection, typename Framer>
        rendezvous-type operator()(const Preconnection&, const Framer&);

        template<typename Preconnection>
        rendezvous-type operator()(const Preconnection&);
    };

    inline constexpr rendezvous_t rendezvous{};
}
```

## Next Steps

A future paper revision to formally propose the API changes extending/modifying [p2762].
